Thank.
NOTE CONF
You.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Welcome, everyone.
Um, this is lecture eight and we're going to talk
NOTE CONF
about word segmentation.
So what is word segmentation.
NOTE CONF
It's it's essentially the task of taking a speech stream
and finding the word the word boundaries.
NOTE CONF
Finding out where a word ends and where the next
one starts.
NOTE CONF
And that might sound like an easy task, but we'll
see why it's difficult and in which respect it's difficult.
NOTE CONF
And also how to how to tackle that task.
It's obviously a task that also children, when they acquire
NOTE CONF
the language needs, need to master because they, they get
an augmented speech stream.
NOTE CONF
They don't know what the words are, where they start
and end and so on.
NOTE CONF
Before we get started, very quick announcement.
Um, next week we are starting with office hours.
NOTE CONF
So one of the Tas, Jon Watts, is offering office
hours on Mondays and Tuesdays.
NOTE CONF
And the times and locations and so on on the
course website.
NOTE CONF
So these are for basically dropping in and asking questions
about the course, be it the assignments, the lecture materials,
NOTE CONF
the tutorials and so on.
So these are just another way of getting help if
NOTE CONF
you're stuck with any of the course material.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So let's get started.
And this worked when I tried it anyway.
NOTE CONF
Just.
Oh look.
NOTE CONF
No sorry for that.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we talk about speech segmentation.
NOTE CONF
It's in the context of language development language acquisition.
And then we'll introduce a new concept called transitional probability
NOTE CONF
which is a form of conditional probability, which is something
you might.
NOTE CONF
Have seen in other contexts.
And then we'll talk about a few experiments.
NOTE CONF
And people have tried to find out how children segment
words.
NOTE CONF
And then we'll introduce another concept called minimum description length,
which in the context of word segmentation is important because
NOTE CONF
it allows you to derive a whole lexicon rather than
just individual words.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Now this is not going to work okay.
NOTE CONF
This is also a good way of introducing another modelling
paradigm.
NOTE CONF
So so far we've seen rule based models.
You know, Pinker's idea that there's a word stored in
NOTE CONF
the lexicon, and then we have a bunch of rules
that operate on them.
NOTE CONF
Sometimes we need extra mechanisms like blocking sort of traditional
linguistic way of doing things.
NOTE CONF
And we've seen neural network models.
Yesterday, for example, we talked about how these can maybe
NOTE CONF
also acquire the past tense.
And they were successful in some respects, not so successful
NOTE CONF
in other respects, but they are a radical empiricist paradigm
because they don't require any rules, not even a lexicon.
NOTE CONF
It's really just association of input and output patterns that
we learn and generalise over.
NOTE CONF
So all we need is a powerful learning algorithm.
We've applied them to past tense, which is obviously taking
NOTE CONF
a base form of a verb and turning it into
the past tense form.
NOTE CONF
This is interesting because in some cases it's a regular
process that you can describe by a rule if you
NOTE CONF
want to, but in other cases the verbs are irregular.
This is actually something that comes fairly late in language
NOTE CONF
acquisition, sort of in the middle of the second year
of of a child's life.
NOTE CONF
Today we're going to look at something that comes really
early, something that even newborns can do quite well, which
NOTE CONF
is word segmentation.
And we'll introduce a third modelling framework, probabilistic modelling, which
NOTE CONF
sort of combines the two extremes.
So there we assume there's some symbolic knowledge, some rules,
NOTE CONF
but there's probabilities attached to to this knowledge.
So there's some numeric and and learnable information but also
NOTE CONF
some rule based information which maybe we want to assume
is innate.
NOTE CONF
We don't have to.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So combining numerical information and rules and the rules may
be innate as I said.
NOTE CONF
Well the probabilities most people want to assume that those
are learned.
NOTE CONF
So this is a way of combining ideas from rationalism,
nativism on the one hand, and empiricism learning based approaches
NOTE CONF
on the other hand.
And today we're going to talk about what segmentation next
NOTE CONF
week we're going to we're going to talk about word
learning and how to derive the semantics of words.
NOTE CONF
But first we need the words.
Before we can do that.
NOTE CONF
It.
Okay, so if we try to situate this in the
NOTE CONF
context of language development as a whole.
So starting from birth children, well babies at that point
NOTE CONF
only make very limited sounds.
Vegetative.
NOTE CONF
Vegetative sounds sort of.
Gurgling and stuff like this.
NOTE CONF
Then things start to sound a bit more like language
with cooing laughter.
NOTE CONF
At about 16 weeks, vocal play and babbling where they
say things like blah blah blah blah blah blah blah
NOTE CONF
and so on.
And that is between 6 and 10 months.
NOTE CONF
Note that this is productive language, right?
This is what the babies produce.
NOTE CONF
We don't know what they understand at this point.
This is much harder to measure.
NOTE CONF
But of course we can.
We can listen to and record what they produce in
NOTE CONF
terms of language.
Then finally, at around a year, 10 to 18 months.
NOTE CONF
They start with single word utterances, things like doggy or
all gone.
NOTE CONF
If you assume that's a single word.
So stuff like this happens.
NOTE CONF
It's isolated utterances, isolated words.
Then the utterances become longer at around 18 months to
NOTE CONF
two word utterances.
Then telegraphic speech.
NOTE CONF
By that I mean speech that doesn't have any articles
and pronouns and prepositions and stuff like that.
NOTE CONF
It's really just nouns and verbs.
That happens around two years, and then about half a
NOTE CONF
year later, children start producing full sentences.
And, you know, if you know a three year old,
NOTE CONF
they can talk quite a lot already.
So you can have a pretty good conversation with a
NOTE CONF
three year old.
So all of this happened surprisingly early and quickly and
NOTE CONF
not exactly at the same time scale for every child,
but the stages are the same and the outcome is
NOTE CONF
pretty much the same as well.
So that is the surprising bit that this is this
NOTE CONF
sort of predetermined sequence.
And that's also why some people assume that that's something
NOTE CONF
that's innate, that, you know, unless something goes wrong, everyone
ends up learning the language.
NOTE CONF
Obviously, there's still differences in how proficient we are, how
how big our vocabulary is, and so on.
NOTE CONF
But the grammar and the basic vocabulary you end up
with comparable.
NOTE CONF
And so for for all of this we need a
lexicon.
NOTE CONF
And we talked about that before.
And whether you assume that the lexicon is, you know,
NOTE CONF
a pinker stylist or it's just a diffuse pattern in
the brain, like a neural network model would assume it
NOTE CONF
needs to be somewhere, right?
We need we need that knowledge about words.
NOTE CONF
So associations between sound sequences, their meanings and their syntax.
So the the sequence.
NOTE CONF
Dog.
Dog is associated with a certain sound.
NOTE CONF
It's associated with certain meaning.
Maybe also evoke certain imagery.
NOTE CONF
And there's syntax.
We know that this is a noun.
NOTE CONF
All of this needs to be sort of acquired, bundled
up, and then stored in the mental lexicon somehow.
NOTE CONF
And children, of course, they don't read until much later,
right?
NOTE CONF
They don't read until they, they they basically start start
school.
NOTE CONF
So initially this is all based on speech, right?
So all language acquisition, at least for the first 5
NOTE CONF
or 6 years, has to be based on speech.
There's obviously some cultures that speak a language that doesn't
NOTE CONF
have a written form.
So definitely that has to be speech all the way.
NOTE CONF
Um.
And then there's the problem that in the speed stream,
NOTE CONF
there isn't really any spaces.
So if you look at a speed stream like, like
NOTE CONF
this here, this is the, um, the sound wave.
So the amount of energy over time.
NOTE CONF
And sure, there's bits where there's more or less energy,
but it doesn't correspond to to word boundaries.
NOTE CONF
And so you have this problem of, uh, associating this,
uh, the sensory input, the signal that comes in with
NOTE CONF
discrete words.
And there's a problem also that the word doesn't always
NOTE CONF
sound the same.
So if two people say dog, they don't pronounce it
NOTE CONF
in exactly the same way.
A child will have a higher pitch than an adult,
NOTE CONF
for example.
Um, if you speak a dialect, you're going to pronounce
NOTE CONF
the words differently, and so on.
But somehow the child is still able to pick up
NOTE CONF
the fact that this is always the word dog, it
always refers to the same concept and so on.
NOTE CONF
And let's go back to written language for a moment
just because it's slightly easier.
NOTE CONF
So this is a poem where I've removed all the
spaces, and it is in a language that maybe you
NOTE CONF
don't know is Spanish.
And yeah, this is really hard to make sense of.
NOTE CONF
And that's sort of the situation the child is in.
Doesn't speak the language.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Because they haven't learned it yet and they don't have
NOTE CONF
any spaces or word boundaries.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
If you want to look up the poem, here's the
link.
NOTE CONF
And here, if you want to follow that link, maybe
in your own time.
NOTE CONF
There's another interesting example.
This is an example with ASL.
NOTE CONF
American Sign Language and sign languages work more or less
like spoken or written languages, but the word boundaries are
NOTE CONF
completely different.
So if you're not a signer and you look at
NOTE CONF
someone signing ASL, you will find it really hard to
determine where a word ends and where a word starts,
NOTE CONF
because the individual words don't correspond 1 to 1 to
signs.
NOTE CONF
Right.
There's multiple signs that can make up a word as
NOTE CONF
a sign that can mean different things and so on.
So that is the situation that the child is in
NOTE CONF
to start with.
And here, for example, let's assume you're able to transcribe
NOTE CONF
this and you can hear the associated letters or phonemes
with with a speech signal.
NOTE CONF
Then you still need to find the word boundaries, right.
This could be the right on the tea kettle.
NOTE CONF
Often chips there.
Donate a kettle of chips of ten chips.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
There.
NOTE CONF
Donate a kettle of ten chips, and so on.
And this is also why speech recognition is hard for
NOTE CONF
machines.
Well, nowadays machines are pretty good at it, but it
NOTE CONF
took a lot of time to to get them to
that point because of this ambiguity.
NOTE CONF
Right?
Even if you are able to take the sound wave,
NOTE CONF
turn it into a sequence of phonemes, then there's still
the the task of finding the word boundaries.
NOTE CONF
And.
Sometimes you can have multiple sentences that make sense, right?
NOTE CONF
And so how do you distinguish between them?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So before the child can even do the past tense
or other complicated things, they need to know what the
NOTE CONF
boundaries are.
Right.
NOTE CONF
They cannot find the past tense of a verb if
they don't know what a verb is, and they cannot
NOTE CONF
find the bit in the speech stream that is used
to denote verbs.
NOTE CONF
So this is very, very sort of basic thing that
needs to happen first.
NOTE CONF
So you need to the infant learning the language needs
to divide the input into reusable units.
NOTE CONF
Then the question is how does she represent those units
and what she knows about then them and when this
NOTE CONF
happens.
So it turns out that this can happen quite early.
NOTE CONF
We'll see an experiment in a moment with eight month
old babies who definitely don't speak yet, but we're still
NOTE CONF
able to do word segmentation and of course, speech segmentation.
Why do we need words right?
NOTE CONF
Maybe words are just things that a linguist has made
up, given that the the speech stream is continuous.
NOTE CONF
But of course you need them in a lot of
different places, right?
NOTE CONF
In the lexicon you want to organise a lexicon in
some way morphology.
NOTE CONF
So things like plurals and past tense, these apply to
certain units in your speech stream.
NOTE CONF
Then syntax and phonology, phonology things like for example stress,
intonation and so on.
NOTE CONF
And syntax is then building building sentences out of those
words.
NOTE CONF
And you don't build those sentences out of arbitrary bits
of speech, but reusable, uh, discrete units that we call
NOTE CONF
words.
So that's why this is important.
NOTE CONF
And now how the how does the child do this.
And we'll see a few examples now.
NOTE CONF
But then we'll, we'll drill down into one particular, uh,
one particular Q that they use.
NOTE CONF
So things like stress patterns.
So English has the advantage that, uh, the stress is
NOTE CONF
fairly regular.
Not 100% regular, but most of the time it's the
NOTE CONF
first syllable of a word that's being stressed.
So here English usually stresses first syllables.
NOTE CONF
Always the first syllable gets the stress right.
And so well that's a good good way to break
NOTE CONF
up the speech stream.
Right.
NOTE CONF
You find the stress.
You find the the part of the speed stream that
NOTE CONF
has the most energy.
And that's where you insert a word boundary.
NOTE CONF
Other languages work differently.
French always has the stress on the last syllable.
NOTE CONF
A lot of languages are not as regular, so you
can't rely on that completely.
NOTE CONF
But in some languages that's a really useful piece of
information.
NOTE CONF
So the difference between hamster and hamster right here the
stress is on the first syllable.
NOTE CONF
So we want this to be a unit in here
stress is on stir.
NOTE CONF
So this has to be a separate word okay.
So that sort of information is available in the form
NOTE CONF
of stress for a tactic.
Constraints.
NOTE CONF
So words are not just made up in an arbitrary
way, but they're made up of syllables normally.
NOTE CONF
And a syllable typically contains a vowel.
And then there's a consonant cluster following that.
NOTE CONF
And a consonant cluster.
Before and after the vowel right.
NOTE CONF
So a vowel and a finite set of consonant clusters
at the beginning and at the end.
NOTE CONF
And then of course, not all consonant clusters are possible
in all languages, so something like a dog is not
NOTE CONF
a possible English word.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So we probably want to assume a boundary here.
And the belongs to the previous word.
NOTE CONF
And dog is a nice possible word of English because
it has the o, the vowel, and then a consonant
NOTE CONF
before and after.
So this regularities are called formal tactics.
NOTE CONF
And the nativists would say, of course this is innate
for tactics, is innate.
NOTE CONF
And that helps you to segment speech.
Then once you know a few words, right, you've learned
NOTE CONF
dog, you've learned bark, and so on.
Then if you hear a sentence where dog and bark
NOTE CONF
occurs and some other words that you don't know, then
that makes the segmentation task much easier, right?
NOTE CONF
Because you can segment out those those two words and
then the rest.
NOTE CONF
Maybe you need to assume new words.
So this is called bootstrapping.
NOTE CONF
You start with some things that you know.
And then that makes the the number of possible combinations
NOTE CONF
go down.
But in the following we'll focus on something very specific
NOTE CONF
statistic regularities.
So um, the uh words obviously are repeated, but also
NOTE CONF
the patterns within the words are repeated in a predictable
way.
NOTE CONF
And we'll see in a moment how we can measure
this and how a child can potentially exploit this to
NOTE CONF
do word segmentation.
So we'll focus not on not on these things here,
NOTE CONF
but just on the statistical regularities.
But before we do that there's a quick quiz.
NOTE CONF
And so this is our I'll give you the opportunity
to, uh, to scan the code.
NOTE CONF
And then we'll start with a quiz.
And this is really great.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Okay, maybe let's get started now.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, we have already hinted at the fact that
what segmentation might also be something that happens in text,
NOTE CONF
and there's actually languages in the world that are written
without spaces.
NOTE CONF
And I've given you a few examples here, and I'd
like you to guess which of these are written without
NOTE CONF
spaces.
So that means, even though it's a written form of
NOTE CONF
the language, we still have the segmentation problem.
So classical Latin Mohawk, which we saw in the tutorial
NOTE CONF
in week one Portuguese, Mandarin or Thai.
So which of these are written without spaces?
NOTE CONF
What do you think?
About that.
NOTE CONF
Amen.
Okay, let's see what people think.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So Latin, 17%.
NOTE CONF
Mohawk 50.
Portuguese 15 for Mandarin, 80 Mandarin and five.
NOTE CONF
Thai.
Let's see what's correct.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so classical Latin is actually an interesting case because,
you know, people don't learn Latin in school anymore, right?
NOTE CONF
But if you learn Latin in some way, then it
is written in a nice, um, contemporary way where you
NOTE CONF
have upper and lower case letters.
You have spaces, you have punctuation, punctuation marks, and so
NOTE CONF
on.
In ancient Rome, they didn't have any of this.
NOTE CONF
It was all uppercase.
No spaces, no punctuation marks.
NOTE CONF
Right?
You can still see this in inscriptions and so on.
NOTE CONF
It just goes on without any breaks.
So Classical Latin was written without spaces.
NOTE CONF
Mohawk is just written in a normal alphabet.
There's nothing special in Portuguese as well.
NOTE CONF
Mandarin is interesting, and as you correctly guessed, there is.
Of course, it's a longer graphic language, so it's written
NOTE CONF
in longer graphs.
But the spaces between the longer graphs don't correspond necessarily
NOTE CONF
to word spaces, right?
A word can correspond to one, two, three, four longer
NOTE CONF
graphs, and the word boundaries are not written down.
Uh, Thai is similar, but is written in a syllable
NOTE CONF
alphabet rather than a letter alphabet.
Also without spaces.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Moving on.
NOTE CONF
Oh, yes.
So I need to introduce this before we go there.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So hopefully I've convinced you that segmentation is an actual
NOTE CONF
problem, even in some written languages, but definitely in spoken
language.
NOTE CONF
And so how do you go about that.
So transitional probability is one solution.
NOTE CONF
So this is about the regularities in the sound sequences
of of a language.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Segmentation is only possible if things are repeated right.
NOTE CONF
Some words like the or dog or blue are occur
more than once.
NOTE CONF
If you look at enough text or speech and so
you can find these regularities, you can find these repetitions.
NOTE CONF
So there is a consistent sequence of the elements both
between words and within words and within the words, certain
NOTE CONF
sequences can occur that can't occur between words.
So you need to look at these transitions between the
NOTE CONF
different sounds or the different letters, right.
Some occur frequently within words, and some occur frequently between
NOTE CONF
words.
And so basically if you look at the unlikely transitions
NOTE CONF
then these are informative about word boundaries.
So and for that we need a simple probabilistic idea.
NOTE CONF
The idea of transitional probability which is really just a
conditional probability.
NOTE CONF
So the probability of y given x.
So this means you have encountered x which can be
NOTE CONF
an event.
But in our case it's going to be a letter
NOTE CONF
or a sound.
And what's the probability that you will also see y.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So you've seen x.
NOTE CONF
What's the probability the next letter or sound is y.
And this is defined as the joint probability of x
NOTE CONF
and y divided by the probability of x.
And this can be approximated or estimated by taking the
NOTE CONF
frequency of x and y occurring together, and the frequency
of x occurring on its own.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So very simple concept.
NOTE CONF
And let's look at a quick example.
Let's look at a particular phoneme the phoneme the.
NOTE CONF
In English.
Let's assume we have a text that occurs 200,000 times,
NOTE CONF
and in 190,000 times.
The next uh phoneme is a vowel.
NOTE CONF
So the, this, that, there, and so on.
There's lots of vowels after this phoneme.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then a mere 200 times we find that
it occurs before the phoneme.
NOTE CONF
Mhm.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what are our transition probabilities.
So the probability of a vowel given the would be
NOTE CONF
190,000 divided by 200,000.
That is 0.95, and the probability of mm given the
NOTE CONF
would be 200 divided by 200,000.
That's 0.001.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So having um, uh, having the uh vowel next is
NOTE CONF
a lot more probable than having.
Mhm.
NOTE CONF
Next.
And of course this is because thumb is not a
NOTE CONF
possible sequence of consonants in English.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this can only occur if there's a word boundary.
So something like I don't know.
NOTE CONF
10th month or something.
Right.
NOTE CONF
We have our first and then we have um and
because this cannot occur in the same word one after
NOTE CONF
the other, there needs to be a word boundary there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So where this transition probability is low, we want to
uh, to assume a world boundary where it is high.
NOTE CONF
For example, this is actually not super great, for example,
but in cases like the and there and so on.
NOTE CONF
We have our other and then we have a vowel
behind it.
NOTE CONF
And this is the the vast majority of cases.
So we want to assume that's the same word.
NOTE CONF
Whereas if a weird consonant follows the then we want
to assume it's it's a word boundary.
NOTE CONF
And if we look at a more elaborate example.
So we have a sentence down here, this is a
NOTE CONF
sentence of English.
And then here I have plotted the bigram transition probability.
NOTE CONF
So this is this probability here as computed over all
pairs of letters in a given text.
NOTE CONF
Right.
We just took a large text and we computed the
NOTE CONF
probability Of um of age given two of I given
h of s given I of I given s, and
NOTE CONF
so on.
And we plot the probability here, and then you can
NOTE CONF
see certain cases where the probability has a minimum.
And I've marked these by lines here.
NOTE CONF
So here for example then here after is here as
well and so on.
NOTE CONF
And not all of these correspond to word boundaries but
some do like for example, this is and then uh,
NOTE CONF
there was no word boundary detected here because as is
could could be a word as well.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So that's actually a good sequence that can occur within
NOTE CONF
a word and then sentence.
This is more like a syllable boundary here here as
NOTE CONF
well.
Syllable boundary.
NOTE CONF
Then we have another word boundary, word boundary syllable boundary
and so on.
NOTE CONF
So this these places where the transitional probabilities are low
are indicative of boundaries, and sometimes they're syllable boundaries, but
NOTE CONF
other times they're word boundaries, sometimes false alarms.
So it's important to note that this is not a
NOTE CONF
perfect indicator of a word boundary, but is one of
the sources of information that is available to the child.
NOTE CONF
These transitional probabilities, in addition to all the other things
that we've said bootstrapping, uh, stress patterns, tactics and so
NOTE CONF
on.
And the assumption is, if the child takes all these
NOTE CONF
different heuristics together, then this is good enough to allow
them to stipulate, uh, word boundaries.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, that is the theory, right?
NOTE CONF
So we think about the problem in abstract speech stream
comes in.
NOTE CONF
There's no boundaries.
How do we find the boundaries?
NOTE CONF
We can use probability and tactics and so on.
But what do children do in practice?
NOTE CONF
How do we find out?
So here's an example for a clever experiment.
NOTE CONF
This is an older study by Safran et al.
And they looked at eight month old babies.
NOTE CONF
So these children, they cannot speak, they cannot walk yet
and so on.
NOTE CONF
But it turns out they can learn where the word
boundaries are.
NOTE CONF
And this is how they found out.
So the experimenters, they made up a language out of
NOTE CONF
nonsense words because they obviously didn't want to test a
particular existing language.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Because it's about language acquisition where you start not knowing
NOTE CONF
the language.
Can you still find the word boundaries?
NOTE CONF
And then they gave them words in this language, for
example, pas de deux, de TI, budo, and so on.
NOTE CONF
And then once you have trained the child a little
bit.
NOTE CONF
So training here just means listening to sequences of words
like this.
NOTE CONF
And then you test them.
You find out, you give them other words which either
NOTE CONF
they've heard before or they haven't heard before.
And can they distinguish them?
NOTE CONF
So probably could be something that I've heard before, but
would be a sequence that is possible, but they haven't
NOTE CONF
heard before.
And it's best to understand this using an example.
NOTE CONF
So this is this is all obviously spoken language.
So they would hear something like barbecue or Galati.
NOTE CONF
So it sounds terrible.
And it's really hard to imagine that the children can
NOTE CONF
make sense of this.
But hidden in the stream are word boundaries.
NOTE CONF
So here, for example, barbecue is a word, right?
It's repeated all the time.
NOTE CONF
T budo is also a word.
It's repeated all the time.
NOTE CONF
But something like.
What was my example here?
NOTE CONF
Dog Ola is not a word, right?
It crosses a word boundary.
NOTE CONF
And also that means it's not repeated or it's not
repeated as often as the real words.
NOTE CONF
I don't know if we can have another example of
here's another example of dog collar, but less, much less
NOTE CONF
common.
And so some transitions are really likely right here.
NOTE CONF
So from PA to B and from B to Ku.
And some transitions are not very likely here.
NOTE CONF
For example, from Ku to T or from door to
go.
NOTE CONF
And are the children able to to tell the difference
right between these high transitional probabilities that indicate we're within
NOTE CONF
a word, and low transitional probabilities that indicate where between
the word right.
NOTE CONF
So this is the exact same logic that we applied
here to our vowel and the versus m and the
NOTE CONF
transition.
And now of course the million dollar question is how
NOTE CONF
do we even know?
Right?
NOTE CONF
These kids can't speak.
You know, they probably are not able to follow instructions
NOTE CONF
very well and so on.
So we need basically a trick.
NOTE CONF
And so this is how these experiments are normally run.
This is called the head turned preference procedure.
NOTE CONF
So we have our baby here sitting on the lap
of caregiver let's say mother listening to the pas de
NOTE CONF
deux and so on.
And this of course gets boring very quickly.
NOTE CONF
So a child listens to that for for a while.
Then there's a break and then they're given a new,
NOTE CONF
uh, a sequence of words that are either valid, they
occur in the training data, like PA, BQ, which is
NOTE CONF
the first one here, or they're given a sequence That
is not one that is frequent in the training data
NOTE CONF
like dog or LA.
So this would be this one here that crosses the
NOTE CONF
word boundary.
And infants have a natural tendency to turn their head
NOTE CONF
towards things that are new and interesting.
So we're predicting that the words that they haven't recognised,
NOTE CONF
that they haven't seen at the training time are new
and interesting.
NOTE CONF
So they should turn their head.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And this is what happens.
So here this is the time it takes them to
NOTE CONF
turn their head for the pod words.
And this is the time we know.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
Longer listening time.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
This is how long they.
NOTE CONF
They pay attention to the new words which are the
part words.
NOTE CONF
Right?
Which they haven't had the training time and the words
NOTE CONF
which they have heard at training time.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So they pay more attention to the to the things
they haven't seen before compared to the things that they
NOTE CONF
have seen before.
So that means when they heard the stream, then it
NOTE CONF
wasn't just a sequence of nonsense syllable, but syllables.
But they were actually able to memorise patterns and later
NOTE CONF
on to recognise whether they've seen these patterns before or
not.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And this has been taken as evidence in the literature
NOTE CONF
that children use these statistical or probabilistic cues about word
boundaries.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So the first here, the nonsense language, um, there's no
NOTE CONF
word boundaries.
It's a continuous stream.
NOTE CONF
Obviously, they don't know the language because it's made up.
So they have to use statistics and then they get
NOTE CONF
the new stimuli and we measure the the time.
They pay attention to the new stimuli.
NOTE CONF
And then we see that the words they're able to
discriminate between words and part words.
NOTE CONF
So sequences that span a word boundary, like these ones,
for example here.
NOTE CONF
So we take three syllables, but we make sure that
they span the word boundary.
NOTE CONF
So there seems to be some statistical learning going on,
some probabilistic learning.
NOTE CONF
And you might say, okay, this could be a fluke
if this was just this one study.
NOTE CONF
But this was 20 years ago, and there have been
lots and lots of studies showing something similar.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so we have pretty good evidence that humans use
statistical information to segment speech.
NOTE CONF
And the limitations of the original story was all three
syllable words.
NOTE CONF
The probabilities were very simple, either 1 or 0.33.
And then in subsequent work, people have looked at longer
NOTE CONF
words and other probabilistic cues and so on.
And here's a fun Ted talk if you want to
NOTE CONF
find out more.
So this Patricia Kuhl, who talks about her research in
NOTE CONF
this area and reviews a lot of different experiments and
results, not just this one study by Safran and colleagues.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let's do a few questions about transitional probability before
we move on.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So first of all, we've seen the transitional probability of
NOTE CONF
y given x right.
This is the probability of encountering a certain unit.
NOTE CONF
Let's say a phoneme or a letter given that you've
seen another letter or another phoneme.
NOTE CONF
And this is good for word segmentation.
You can show that it's useful for written words as
NOTE CONF
well, not just spoken ones, but what could you possibly
detect using this paradigm?
NOTE CONF
Is there anything else you can think?
Uh, where probabilities such as these conditional probabilities are useful,
NOTE CONF
for example, to detect phrase boundaries to segment images.
Right?
NOTE CONF
To find the objects in an image, uh, to take
phoneme boundaries.
NOTE CONF
Right.
The the units that make up the speech stream to
NOTE CONF
detect sentence boundaries or to detect syllable boundaries.
So take a guess.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
You know what I mean?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
That's.
Right.
NOTE CONF
I think.
That's good.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let's see what people think.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Ah, it seems to work for everything.
Almost.
NOTE CONF
So phrase boundaries.
Let's talk about that first.
NOTE CONF
Yes, definitely.
So if you think about I don't know example again
NOTE CONF
the dog.
So sentence boundary detection is the task of taking a
NOTE CONF
sequence of words and finding where a sentence ends or
begins.
NOTE CONF
And here, for example.
Do we want the sentence boundary here?
NOTE CONF
Probably not.
Because in English you can't really have a sentence that
NOTE CONF
ends in the.
Right.
NOTE CONF
There needs to be something else after that.
Typically an adjective or a noun.
NOTE CONF
So this is going to be a high transitional probability.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So that sort of information is also useful for sentence
boundaries.
NOTE CONF
If you have a sentence boundary then presumably the next
word is a low probability.
NOTE CONF
Transition.
Image segmentation.
NOTE CONF
I don't think so.
I mean it's maybe possible in theory if you want
NOTE CONF
to find the edges of objects in an image.
Then that could indicate a transitional probability.
NOTE CONF
However, in reality this is not something people use in
image segmentation.
NOTE CONF
So the answer is no.
Phoneme boundaries.
NOTE CONF
Perhaps most most researchers assume the phonemes you know the
phonemes before you do anything.
NOTE CONF
And there is actually pretty good evidence that this is
something that is probably innate.
NOTE CONF
An inventory of phonemes.
So in the world's languages, there's about 4045 phonemes.
NOTE CONF
And what happens during language acquisition is that you stop
being able to recognise and produce the ones that don't
NOTE CONF
occur in your language.
For example, English doesn't have a phoneme, so English speakers
NOTE CONF
often are not able to pronounce it.
But you can show that as babies you're able to
NOTE CONF
recognise and pronounce these phonemes.
So it's a process of unlearning probably.
NOTE CONF
So that's probably a different mechanism.
Phrase boundaries.
NOTE CONF
Sentence boundaries work very similar to phrase boundaries.
So yes, definitely.
NOTE CONF
And syllable boundaries.
We've already seen this example with the, um, where we
NOTE CONF
looked at the transitional probabilities in a sentence and we
got some word boundaries, but we also got some syllable
NOTE CONF
boundaries.
So probably syllable boundaries are not as strong as the
NOTE CONF
word boundaries, but they work in a similar way.
So yes.
NOTE CONF
So these I think are the the correct answers.
Moving on.
NOTE CONF
So um, if you're able to see slide 15, which
was the slide with the, um, nonsense language, uh, can
NOTE CONF
you work out these transitional probabilities?
The transitional probability of T given Q the transition probability
NOTE CONF
of DAW given bu and of Rau given p.
So just to quickly go back.
NOTE CONF
This.
Was this.
NOTE CONF
Here it is.
I'm talking about this set of words.
NOTE CONF
So if possible, solutions here.
2/5.
NOTE CONF
0/3.
5/5.
NOTE CONF
165.
This is.
NOTE CONF
Something.
That.
NOTE CONF
You.
I don't know.
NOTE CONF
What's happening?
Something.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Here we go.
NOTE CONF
Come on.
Okay, so I don't want to spend too much time
NOTE CONF
on this, so I'll give you the answers, and I
will quickly show you how to do the first one
NOTE CONF
t given.
Q.
NOTE CONF
So what we need to do here is, first of
all, to count how often t occurs.
NOTE CONF
There's one, two, three, four, five t's okay.
And then we need to work out how often this
NOTE CONF
T is preceded by Q.
So there's one here.
NOTE CONF
This is something else.
And this has a cool and this is something else.
NOTE CONF
So it's two out of five.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So count how often they occur together and count how
often tea occurs on its own.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So are we done now?
NOTE CONF
Unfortunately not.
Not so.
NOTE CONF
Now we have a way of segmenting our speech stream
of finding word boundaries.
NOTE CONF
However, there's often ambiguity.
Often there's more than one way to segment the speech
NOTE CONF
stream.
If you remember the example at the beginning, the kettle
NOTE CONF
on the red chips or whatever it was there, we
could find different ways of inserting meaningful phrase boundaries.
NOTE CONF
And so how do we know which one is the
correct one?
NOTE CONF
So Because we are not learning just a single word.
We are learning a lot of words at the same
NOTE CONF
time.
You need to combine the speech segmentation with basically the
NOTE CONF
learning of the lexicon.
The the set of words.
NOTE CONF
And here two authors, Brandon Cartwright, came up with a
clever idea that uses a concept that's called minimum description
NOTE CONF
length.
So basically it's a way of learning a lexicon that's
NOTE CONF
as efficient as possible.
You have some some data, some information that comes in
NOTE CONF
either speech or text.
And you want to find a lexicon that describes that
NOTE CONF
speech or text as efficiently, efficiently as possible.
And they came up with the following formula.
NOTE CONF
So they compute the size of what they call the
description.
NOTE CONF
So this is basically the encoding of of your input.
And this is the size of your lexicon and the
NOTE CONF
size of the how you use that lexicon.
The data encoding and you want to if you want
NOTE CONF
to compare different lexical.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So you have different ways of segmenting your speech stream.
You want to find which one is the better one.
NOTE CONF
Then you compute this description length and you take the
one with the smallest description length.
NOTE CONF
So how does the description length actually work?
So first of all, it has a few advantages.
NOTE CONF
First of all, it gives you the a preference for
shorter words, which is generally a good idea.
NOTE CONF
It has a preference for reusing words and it also
maximises the probability of each word.
NOTE CONF
So what uses words that occur as often as possible.
And it's best to to look at an example.
NOTE CONF
So here's a made up example of two utterances here.
Do you see the kitty kitty kitty.
NOTE CONF
Do you like the kitty?
Um, and let's assume we've segmented this, maybe using transitional
NOTE CONF
probability or whatever information we have to segment it.
And note that the segmentation isn't quite correct here, so
NOTE CONF
that we've treated as a single word, which makes sense
because it occurs in each utterance and always kitty and
NOTE CONF
occur together.
So maybe this is not a bad segmentation.
NOTE CONF
And then this brings us to the lexicon.
So the lexicon here is simply an enumeration of all
NOTE CONF
the words.
So do is a word the kitty because we haven't
NOTE CONF
segmented it as a word you like.
See.
NOTE CONF
So we only have five words here.
And then we have what's called the derivation.
NOTE CONF
So this is just a list of the words.
So one is two, three is u, five is c
NOTE CONF
and two is the kitty.
So this is the derivation of these utterances given this
NOTE CONF
lexicon.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And now you can see the trade off, right?
We can either have a lexicon that has a lot
NOTE CONF
of short words that are repeated all the time, or
we can have a lexicon with longer words that are
NOTE CONF
less frequently repeated.
In one case, the lexicon will be long, but the
NOTE CONF
derivation will be short and not the case, the lexicon
will be long and the derivation will be short.
NOTE CONF
Right?
So we're trading off the length of the lexicon and
NOTE CONF
the length of the derivation.
And this is exactly what minimum description length says, right.
NOTE CONF
The size of the lexicon.
So we see how long this lexicon is and the
NOTE CONF
size of the data encoding.
So we count how long the derivation is.
NOTE CONF
And we just define the size as the number of
letters and digits.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So we count how many digits are there in the
NOTE CONF
lexicon not counting the the spaces.
And we count how many numbers are there in the
NOTE CONF
derivation.
And so if you do this then you get a
NOTE CONF
length of 25 for the lexicon and the length of
ten for the derivation.
NOTE CONF
There's ten different words in the derivation, so the description
length overall will be 35.
NOTE CONF
And let's assume we have this segmentation.
So this segmentation is treating the and Kitti as separate
NOTE CONF
words but is otherwise the same.
So we have a slightly bigger lexicon right.
NOTE CONF
Because the and Kitti are now separate words in the
lexicon.
NOTE CONF
But we have a and we have a slightly longer
derivation.
NOTE CONF
So because now here one is two, three is you,
five is see and two is the and so on.
NOTE CONF
And so if we combine these then we get a
description length of 26 as the number of characters in
NOTE CONF
the lexicon and 13 as the number of characters in
the derivation.
NOTE CONF
So 39 so that means here the description length is
longer than here.
NOTE CONF
So that means this lexicon would be better under this
measure of minimum description length than this lexicon.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so here you might say well, but the kitty
should be two separate words.
NOTE CONF
So it's actually giving us the wrong answer.
But what's what's going on of course, is that if
NOTE CONF
you've only ever seen those three utterances, then you have
no evidence to to assume that there is a separate
NOTE CONF
word from Kitty because you've only seen it with Kitty,
right?
NOTE CONF
So this is actually the more efficient encoding.
And this is what MDL tells us here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I'm out of time.
NOTE CONF
So I'll skip this is the details of the the
experiment that Brenton Cartwright did.
NOTE CONF
But to summarise we've talked about speech segmentation and we've
talked about how to find the word boundaries.
NOTE CONF
And then once you have an idea of where the
word boundaries are, how do you actually compute the lexicon,
NOTE CONF
given that there's still a lot of ambiguity and a
lot of possible ways of segmenting your speech stream?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That's it.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.